---
title: 50 seconds of Islamic History (Ver. 1.1)
author: mromanov
layout: post
permalink: /2012/11/50seconds_1-1/
categories:
  - Dissertation Appendices
  - Maps
tags:
  - al-Dhahabi
  - Islamic world
  - Longue duree
  - Maps
  - R
  - "Ta'rikh al-islam"
---
<span class='embed-youtube' style='text-align:center; display: block;'></span>  
(**Best viewed in HD**)

How the Islamic world changed over time? Can we get a glimpse into the dynamics of this change? Well, we can definitely give it a try.

Medieval Arab historians put together a great number of biographical collections that include from hundreds to tens of thousands of biographical records. In most cases we can get decent social profiles on most of these individuals: their geographical origins, tribal affiliations, religious specializations, secular occupations, etc. Their biographies often mention places that they visited in one capacity or another. Looking into how the frequency of mentions of geographical places changed over time we can get a glimpse into how the centers of Islamic culture appeared, flourished and faded away.

This visualization—50 Seconds of Islamic History, Version 1.1—shows top 100 locations from the biographies of al-Dhahabi&#8217;s *Ta’rikh al-islam*, the 52-volume biographical collection from the 14th century CE that covers 700 years of Islamic history and includes over 30,000 biographies of individuals who left a mark on the historical map of Islamic culture. One can hardly treat the data from such sources as statistically valid in the modern sense, but they still should reflect the major tendencies of historical change.

**Current Data Set**:  
*Period:*  41-700 AH / 661-1301 CE (Volumes 4-52)  
*Biographies:* ~12,850 (out of ~29,000)  
*Toponym Mentions:* ~ 25,200

**NB:** *Nisba*s—or “descriptive names”—that point to the geographical origins of individuals are not included into this visualization. (Examples of geographical *nisba*s: the name al-Baghdadi tells that a person was strongly affiliated with the city of Baghdad, al-Dimashqi—with the city of Damascus, al-Naysaburi—with the city of Nishapur, etc.)

*More to come, more to follow&#8230;*